Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by two guests, Doctor Arvid Ogren
and Doctor Manus Patten. Uh, Doctor Ogren is a
return guest. He's now assistant professor at the Cleveland
Clinic Learner College of Medicine at Case Western Reserve
University. And Dr. Patten is teaching professor in the
Department of Biology at Georgetown University, and they are
editors of the book we're going to talk about
today, which is the Paradox of the organism, adaptation
and internal conflict. So Doctor Ogren, welcome back to
the show. Doctor Patton, welcome to the show. Really
nice to have you on both.
Yeah, thanks for having us.
Yeah, OK, so, uh, let me start by this.
Uh, WHAT is the paradox of the organism? What
does that mean in the context of evolutionary biology
and the philosophy of biology?
So, uh, I can take that one. The, the,
the term paradox of the organism comes from Dawkins,
as there's so many, uh, terms in evolutionary biology
now. Um, WHAT he was referring to there was
this observation that it's actually kind of a surprise
that we have perfectly functioning, you know, perfectly good
organisms, despite the potential for internal conflicts and selfish
replicators inside of them. To undo them from within.
Um, IT, it actually, it, it, it demands an
explanation how you can have these organisms which are
paragons of cooperation and internal harmony, at least at
first glance, uh, despite the constant threat from selfish
replicators within. So things like selfish genetic elements and
selfish cells, the cancerous cells and the like. Um,
SO perhaps not a paradox to a philosopher. I
think philosophers would say that's not, that's not so
much a paradox as it is an interesting observation
and maybe a, a thing that needs explanation, but,
uh, the, uh, you know, the thing that needs
explanation about the organism doesn't make for as, as
good a title as the character of the organism
does.
I think, and one thing you can kind of
justify, call it the paradox in, in this more
kind of way that biologists use it to just
means something that we haven't explained yet, is that
Dawkins pointed out that organisms have traditionally been just
taken for granted, that they are there and they
work. And kind of from his kind of selfish
gene point of view, that isn't the fact, that
isn't just something you can take for granted. It's
there and it needs to be explained. Um, AND
that is kind of like the, the entry point
for us, uh, into this book.
But let me just ask you more, some, I
guess, a provocative question here, but I mean, isn't
it a paradox if we approach evolution through a
gene's eye view of it through a gene-centric approach
to it? I mean, if For example, as some
people have suggested, we take as the unit of
selection to be, for example, the entire cell or
even, uh, organisms as individuals, wouldn't that paradox just
not be there?
And it, it becomes much more, it becomes, as
you say, a paradox from the point of view
of, of genes or, or replicators because, you know,
the whole point of biology is to an extent
to explain why things are the way they are
and not just, And why not in another way?
It turns out like life as we have it
here on this planet is organized in this kind
of complex ways with units coming together in, um,
to, to build organisms. Uh, AND from a gene's
point of view, then, why isn't it just, um,
self-replicating molecules, um, persisting around on their own? Why
do they come together, uh, evolutionarily to, to form
these bodies, uh, as we see them? Um. And
from that point of view then, is that what,
why is it, why is it not just still,
um, virus-like entities? Why do we see this kind
of extraordinary diversity, uh, of complex life, uh, that
we do?
Mhm. But what is an organism actually from the
point of view of evolutionary biology? What does it
mean exactly?
I, I would say it's one of these bundles
of biological activity. So, so Ar described a hypothetical
world where biological activity is, is, is engaged in
by the virus-like entities and that's all there is.
You can, you can imagine such a world where
biological activity is limited to just that, and yet
on this planet, we see that activity come to
be bundled into chunks, which we call organisms. Um,
SIMILARLY, there, there's an analogy in economics where you
can imagine just a bunch of economic activity. Just
a, a marketplace where people exchange goods, um, and
that's all there is, but instead, we find firms
where people come together and some economic activities is
arranged internally where there's an internal harmony and some
internal logic to things. So, so organisms are these
bundles of biological activity. They're bounded, they have some
boundaries, um, and so, so, so we can off
of that, that, that's the definition of organism. Not
one without some problems, you get into some difficult,
uh, uh, areas where sometimes you have to squint
and, and decide whether that's an organism or not.
Um, AND that's where it gets kind of interesting.
I, I think any, any grade schooler could tell
you what an organism is. It's a dog, it's
a flamingo, it's a sunflower, um, but then as
you get more educated, you actually get more confused
about what an organism, uh, actually is. Uh, SOME
of the problem cases arise in that case.
Yeah, yeah, that's why we have to define our
terms here. So, um, but in the context of
evolutionary biology as well, what is a conflict? Because
we're going to talk a little bit about different
kinds of conflict here, particularly focusing on internal conflicts
because we're going to be talking about the organism.
What is conflict and how does it apply specific
to, uh, specifically to the organism?
So conflict in, in evolutionary biology, we usually talk
about that when we have two entities that have
kind of conflicting fitness interests, and there you can
kind of get an evolutionary conflict of, over how
that, what, what may be good for one entity's
fitness may be detrimental to the other entity's fitness.
Now, this can, uh, we can Describe this in
quite general terms, that this is usually something we
think of individuals having conflicts with each other, um,
over, uh, over something. Um, BUT as we kind
of show in this book that these kind of
conflicts, um, you can apply the same logic to
lower-level entities. So cells within the bodies may have
conflict with fitness interests. What's good in the short
Term for a tumor cell, um, is bad in
the short term for the, uh, for the full
multicellular body. What is good for one, type of
gene may be bad evolutionarily for another type of
gene, uh, within the same, uh, body. Um, AND
that is, when we say, when we use that
kind of like what's good or bad, we're talking
here in terms of, uh, fitness interests over evolutionary
time.
And that's it we're doing there you know that
that's a move we're making like all the time
and if you're reminded that not everybody thinks this
way, uh, about organisms, uh, I, I, I think,
I think everyone might think this way comfortably about
organisms engaging in conflicts and cooperation, like organisms have
behavior and there's a whole field of behavioral ecology
about those behaviors, but I think what motivates behavioral
ecologists, it's the same thing that motivates us, but
we're not thinking about. Meerkats getting in, uh, you
know, cooperative arrangements or conflicts. We're thinking about genes
and cells doing that instead and applying some of
the same intuition and some of the same models
even to those internal conflicts.
And approaching things through the genes I view or
through the point of view of genes, how do
the interests of the different genes get aligned in
an organism? I mean, how does that happen?
It's kind of various, uh, ways. The kind of,
the, the central way I would say is that
they typically share the same route into the next
generation, um, and they kind of, that, that route
then is set up in, in what we, what
we usually say is a fair way. So in
a, in a, uh, sexually reproducing organism such as
ourselves, um, we have two copies of each gene,
but only one of them gets transmitted to the
next generation. And the, the, the kind of the
way that, uh, that is decided, which, which copy
that is, is through what is essentially is a
lottery, and the lottery through, of, um, meiosis. Now,
uh, that works really rather well to, to align
the interests of the genes of the body. However,
then, there are, uh, kind of extraordinary number of
fantastic examples where genes have evolved, um, strategies to,
uh, circumvent that. And kind of uh bias a
lot in their own favor, so instead of ending
up in 50% of the, the gametes or the
offspring, they end up in a much higher frequency
uh than that, um. So that's kind of one
of the central ways that uh genetic conflicts are
uh managed within the body.
Mhm. And uh what about different uh levels of
selection? I, I mean, first of all, what do
you make of the, uh, multi of multi-level selection?
I mean, do you consider the different levels of
selection? Do you only consider the genetic level of
selection? How do you approach that? And then, uh,
what can conflict occur between different levels of selection?
I, I, I think yes to all, um, uh,
maybe I, maybe, let me back up and tell
a little story here, uh, a little evolutionary tale
to, to, to, to, to, to explain where these
levels come from, uh, because we don't get these
levels all at once, uh, so every kind of
organism we can think of had to arise at
some point. That way of organizing, uh, biological activity
didn't exist always. It had to come into existence
by some evolutionary process. We call these. Major transitions
in individuality. So, one canonical example, one that's made
familiar to us, is the transition from a world
that was entirely unicellular. So if we go back
a billion years, I think yeah, about a billion
years, we'd be, we'd see nothing but unicellular organisms.
There'd be no multicellular organisms, at least no big
and charismatic ones at least. There, there's maybe some
filaments and maybe some films, and those are definitely
multicellular, no disrespect to them. But in terms of
like the complex multicellularity that we uh display, that
sort of thing didn't exist about a billion years
ago. So, predominantly, things were unicellular. To get to
a multicellular organism where biological activity is, is taking
place in a multicellular blob requires some, some evolutionary
transition. What it requires is for cells to come
together and cooperate in a sense. Um, AND to,
and to, to, to have a fitness of their
own, not so much fitness of the parts. Um,
AND that transition. It's, it's an interesting one. What
it then invites for, for us, what we find
interesting about it is that you have these entities,
cells in our case, where if you back up
the tape, a billion years, a few million years,
you'll find those cells have fitness interests of their
own, but then through a transition, we stop thinking
about the cells as having a fitness interest or,
or fitness at all. We think of the individual,
the multicellular individual as being the bearer of fitness
and also being the bearer, therefore, of adaptations. Um,
AND so, what the major transitions in evolution perspective
gives us is a story where in the beginning,
we had adaptations at this level and evolution taking
place at this level, but then you build up
more complicated arrangements, um, and and belongs to these
higher levels. Of course, for us, what we're interested
in is, is the backsliding, right? This cooperation gets
you these new and fantastic kinds of organisms, but
the conflicts we find very interesting. They also get
you a lot of interesting evolutionary elaboration as well.
Um Uh, IN, in, in a sense, what, uh,
what biodiversity is all about for us is how
conflicts and cooperation, really how, how those conflicts have
been settled, uh, and tamed by organisms.
But when it comes to multi-level selection, do you
consider, uh, all the levels from gene selection all
the way to group selection, or is group selection
something that you, uh, Don't consider, I mean, I,
I'm asking you this because I know that there's
lots of discussion surrounding group selection and some people
consider, for example, uh, cultural group selection but not
genetic group selection and so on. So what is
your take on that?
Emma, so the, the, the kind of the, uh,
relationship between the genes IVO evolution and, uh, what
we now call multi-level selection, what has historically been
called, uh, group selection has been quite, um, complicated
and at times quite, uh, contentious. They have sometimes
been, uh, conceived as kind of direct, um, kind
of empirical rivals, making kind of either one of
them is true and Um, the other one falls.
I think these days, most people would kind of
think of them, that that is the wrong way
to think about their relationship, but rather they are
a different way of conceptualizing the same, uh, process.
And then you kind of, depending on your preference,
you can model that using a multi-level selection, um,
framework. Um, AND within multi-level selection, there are, uh,
various ways you can do that, and people will
have their own preferences. Uh, AND then you have
a kind of a traditional gene selectionist way, and
kind of related to that is the kind of
inclusive fitness frameworks. And people can kind of, kind
of choose their own, um, tools. Um, AND kind
of I think where Man and I have landed
that these are different tools of doing it. There's
an interesting question, I think about When are the
kind of assumptions you make within one modeling framework
so different from another one that we should be
worried about that maybe these can statistically give you
the same prediction, but kind of closely, biologically, what,
what is going on, uh, are now quite different,
so we should be a little bit worried about
that. Um, BUT what, what stems from that is
that kind of the kinds of internal conflict that
we, uh, study in this book can meaningfully be
described as conflict between different levels in kind of
a, in, in, in a hierarchy of, um, of,
uh, of selection, if you, if done, uh, properly
within kind of thinking about time and how you
conceptualize, um, selection. There's actually one chapter in Specifically
within the book by a philosopher Pierre Bra who
kind of tackles that and kind of makes an
argument that if you properly account for time scales,
often these kind of conflicts will actually, uh, dissolve,
that it doesn't really become meaningful to talk about
conflict between different levels if done at the right
kind of, uh, evolutionary time scale. But that being
said, that kind of it, um, kind of put
a particular time scale, it can be meaningful to
be thought of, uh, as a conflict between, between
levels.
Mhm. Yeah, I, I will have actually Doctor Brat
on the show later this year, so I think
I can talk a little bit more about that
with him. Uh uh.
Sorry, uh, wonderful, he's an excellent, uh, uh, uh
philosopher and one who really understands, uh, uh, biological
problems.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure. So, uh, Doctor Patton,
earlier you mentioned transitions in individuality. I was actually
going to ask as well, what is individuality? I
mean, again, in the context of evolutionary biology, what
does that mean and how does individuality come about?
Yeah, this is another one where if you ask
a child what's an individual, they'll have no problem
giving you an answer, like you're an individual, I'm
an individual, that dog's an individual, that sunflower, that's
an individual. Um, IT'S only when you get really
educated that you could get confused about where, how
to settle what an individual is. AND so I
think when we look carefully at biological individuals, I,
I think some of the, that, that's where we,
we see some of this, this mess, uh, which
is fun to work with. There are maybe two
moods for describing and defining what biological individuals are,
and one is rooted more in function and physiology.
Um, AND so, so for example, one way to
decide whether this is an individual or whether this
is 2 or 3 or more is to let
the immune system, uh, determine self versus non-self. And
so if you come from that perspective, it's a,
it's more of an organismal function definition. Um, SO,
uh, organisms which are bounded by their metabolisms and
the like, and their, in their, in their systems
and their physiology, that's what makes a biological individual.
So something like a, a human and its microbes.
Arguably, you could say that that is an organismal
arrangement because you wouldn't be quite the same, you
wouldn't function the same if we were to give
you a microbe transplant or wave a wand and
eliminate all of your microbes. So, so by that
definition then the human plus all those microbes, that's
one individual because it's one organism. An alternative definition,
which I think is more, be more important to
us as evolutionary biologists down to evolutionary individuality, um,
and how fitness, uh, uh, uh, payoffs are are
paid out. Um, SO, so something that has a
shared interest in maximizing some fitness or in having
traits that maximize that fitness, we would say that
is one single individual. So something like a human
and microbes, given that the microbes can reproduce separately.
That, you know, aren't aren't tied necessarily to the
reproduction of their host, that would argue for the
human and its microbes not being an evolutionary individual,
uh, in that sense, and so not a biological
individual. So
actually, I, I, I was just going to say
actually, in our case, at least as humans, we
need the microbes to survive, right? I mean, the,
we, we need the gut microbiome, the, and, and
other kinds of microbiomes in our body for it
to function properly.
I think that's right. If you were to remove
all our microbes, we'd be in some distress. So
organismally, the way we function relies on those as
parts. You can think of them as parts of
this overall individual, but evolutionarily, the microbes' fitness is
not tied to ours, right? They can reproduce without
us, and we can reproduce without them. We might
not exchange, we might not transmit their, their progeny
to our progeny in the same, in the same
fashion as I transmit all of my genome to
my progeny.
And in, in, in a way it goes back
to kind of the earlier point about how we,
how we managed them. Internal genetic conflicts, it's kind
of like whether two parts are kind of transmitted
together is kind of a crucial part and when
in a human and our microbes, yes, they're essential,
but there's this difference in how things are, uh,
reproduced into the next generation. But, and just kind
of one more point on the, kind of the,
um, the messiness of what a biological individual is.
We have one chapter in, in the book by
Ellen Clark and, and her colleague, uh, Will Morgan,
but Ellen has, is also an excellent, uh, philosopher
like Perry. She's written a whole book on the,
the kind of concept of biological, biological individuality and
really kind of drilling into all kind of possible
complications, uh, that come with it, both kind of
when you approach it from a From a biologist
trying to make sense of what is it really
that, that I study, but also kind of the,
the numerous kind of philosophical, uh, issues, uh, that
arise when you try to kind of individuate, uh,
things. Um, uh, YEAH, so that, that, that came
out just the other year and it's, it's, it's
a fantastic read.
One of the things Ellen uses in her notion
of the, of the, the individual, the essence of
the individual is this shared expectation of the future,
which I think is something she, that that phrase,
I think Dawkins uses that phrase in his organism
paper talking about the, you know, organisms have a
shared expectation of the future. That's why they function
together, that's why they're not overcome by their conflicting
replicators. So to the extent that things have a
shared expectation of the future. You can expect low
conflict, where there's not that same expectation like between
me and my microbes. ME and my microbes, myself,
my microbes might be in conflict given that we
don't have a shared expectation of the future. Their
fitness is not my fitness and vice versa.
Right. But since we have these internal conflicts and
we've already talked a little bit about or alluded
to some of them here, uh, earlier, like for
example, conflict between different genes, conflict between, uh, cancerous
cells and, uh, quote unquote normal cells and so
on. Um, HOW do these internal conflicts allow us
to get a better understanding of what an organism
is?
I, I think it brings a new perspective on
it. It kind of is in line very much
with that kind of evolutionary approach to, uh, individuality
that it kind of turns the question about what
an organism is, um, into one about kind of
the alignment of fitness interests that to get the
fully functional organism, you need, uh, an arrangement such
that that a part of working towards the same
goal. And again, that is something that I think
traditionally has kind of been taken for granted or
that of course the parts will do, but I
think this kind of paradoxical organism perspective or inside
view gives you is that um, Can makes you
take a step back and say, well, maybe, maybe
I can't just take this for granted. And here
are kind of the kind of empirical observation about
genetic conflict and cancers and, and, and so on.
It's a good reason that, you know, we, we
kind of have to like build it up from,
from the ground. Why do these kind of align,
uh, to begin with. Now, I think that it's
kind of, there, there are discussions to be had
about how important were conflicts and the origin of,
uh, individual organisms versus they are once the kind
of the organismality itself is, um, is established. But
I think for us, taking this kind of paradox
viewpoint is a, is a, I think a very,
uh kind of tantalizing invitation to kind of make
sense of this fascinating, uh, biology that we have
kind of felt is often kind of brushed a
little bit, uh, under the rug. And not really
kind of taking seriously, uh, kind of what the
significance are for, for evolutionary, uh, theory.
Right. And uh should we think about organisms as
unified agents, and I guess in this particular case,
we will also have to talk a little bit
about what agency means in the context of evolutionary
biology, but what is your take on that?
I would say definitionally, you sort of have to
take them as unified agents, otherwise, it's not really
an organism, it's not a unified, if, if all
the parts are in conflict, uh, and you know,
and the knives are out. It, it's only an
organism to the extent that there is this unity
of purpose. Um, BUT empirically, our organisms agents? I,
I think no, I I mentioned this, this sense
we had that often these conflicts get swept under
the rug. We have a theory about organisms doing
things. But overlooking all the parts doing things too
and having interests of their own fitness interests of
their own, and even adaptations of their own, um,
and so the book is really a Putting a
spotlight on these internal conflicts. It's not that I,
I, I don't think or I think that organisms
don't exist. Um, AND then it's all just selfish
genetic elements and selfish genes, um, uh, uh, and
like, I think we're, I think we well appreciate
that organisms appear to be these unified agents, um,
and by definition have to be unified to a
certain extent, otherwise we wouldn't call them organisms in
the first place. But neither us thinks that the,
that. Selfish genetic elements are a rarity or aren't
important to the evolutionary process. I think we think
quite the opposite and uh want to convince others
to think quite the opposite too that there are
uh big implications of selfish, uh, genetic elements, selfish
cells, and all, all these internal conflicts.
And it it's worth mentioning here also that agency
in of itself is, is one of those words
kind of like individual, individual or organism that, that
means different things to different um biologists and different,
um, philosophers. In this book and, and kind of
in the work that Mannus and I have been
doing, we've kind of very much worked within a
tradition that takes, can talk about agents as being
this fitness maximizing, uh, entities, and we've been kind
of interested in what happens to that notion of
agency when you have entities within that also can
maximize their own fitness in conflicting ways. What, what
is left of that kind of concept. Now, there's
a, a different tradition and probably in many ways,
a bigger tradition, I think. About agency, much more
in kind of like what makes living organisms different
from non-living things. And then you kind of, you
draw upon different, uh, concepts. Now, I think internal
conflict has a lot to offer that, uh, tradition,
um, as well, but, uh, I, I would say
that kind of like the work that we have
done in this book and elsewhere have operated, much
more in this kind of fitness-centric view, uh, of
agency and, and not in this kind of light,
the um, The, the, the kind of arguments about
what makes living different from non-living and kind of
what is are the kind of attributes of proper,
um, biological agents and are those with a, um,
A mind different than those without a mind and,
and, and, and so on, that, that also exists.
And so I guess just to be clear, we're
not kind of talking about agents here, uh, in
that kind of way.
OK, so, uh, just to get this point clear,
from what you said there, I got the sense
that then at least some of what you explore
in your book can inform the discussion surrounding what
separates the organic from the inorganic. Is that it?
Did I get that right?
Well, I, I, I, I think, I think, I
think there's that big, uh, uh, debate. We have
been much more centric on, on kind of fitness-related
definitions of agency. I think that will be part
of, of, of, of anything that, that, uh, defines,
uh, living from, from, from non-living, but I guess
on the whole, we have operated within a much
kind of narrower definition of, uh, of things.
OK. So earlier we talked about, for example, the
fact that we have uh microbiomes in our body
like the gut micro microbiome, the oral microbiome, and
I guess that, uh, we can already use that
to Make a case that maybe our own organisms
as human beings operate as ecosystems, uh, but, uh,
can we think of organisms more broadly as ecosystems
or not?
I maybe, I, I, I, I don't also try
to turn it around and ask, can we think
of Ecosystems is, is organisms. I, I think there's
a, you know, the Philippe Punneman has a chapter
on this in the book, um, and, uh, took
in a direction for us was surprising. He was
thinking about ecology, so, you know, in the ecological
literature going back a few decades. There was a
classic dispute between Clemens and Gleeson over how to
describe a community of plants. Is it, is it
like an organism, uh, or is it just a
happenstance collection of, of things kind of, you know,
coming in and out, dispersing in, dispersing out, and
like, and Clemens was much more in the, in
the, in the mood of a community is, is
like an organism. It has a, it has an
ontogeny, it develops, um, and it has some state
that it's developing toward, um. That that's one view
of, of a community or an ecosystem that it's
organismal in that regard. Um, But, and, and, you
know, another question, you know, so, so in some,
sometimes an organism can be like an ecosystem. An
ecosystem has a function. Uh, JUST like organisms have
functions, you know, things go in, things go out
of an ecosystem. There are inputs and outputs, you
can measure them, they're measurable. Um, OTHER times though,
you, you might wanna describe an organism more like
an agent where it has goals, and I'm not
sure you can do the same thing with any
old ecosystem. I'm not sure. I, I suppose Clements
might have thought there were goals in terms of
where the community was going, um, uh, but for
us, the goals are always measured in terms of
fitness. And so I think it's, it's harder to
make the case that something like the human plus
its microbiome has one single fitness interest. Given the,
the room there is for different transmission routes. Um,
SO, so hard to make a case that the
human plus its microbes is one single agent, arguably
an ecosystem, uh, in terms of, you know, things
go in, things go out, you know, ice cream
goes in, um, and maybe, uh, uh, uh happy
digestion comes out or maybe not depending on one's
microbiome. Um, SO it, it's definitely an ecosystem, but
maybe not an agent. So I think what Philippe,
uh, points to is this, this is acts as
a variation. Organisms can be more like ecosystems perhaps,
or more like agents. Um, I think when they're
more agential, I think you're getting closer to an
evolutionary individuality kind of notion of things. When they're
more ecosystem-like, it's more like that organismal notion of
biological individuality where functions, you know, a human plusus
microbes, still that, that's what's required. Those are parts
to that function. But they're not tied evolutionarily to
one another. It's made more fruitful to think of
them as an ecosystem instead.
Right. So, uh, going back to the notion of
internal conflicts and now, uh, I would like to
explore this more in terms of, for example, how
we approach medicine nowadays in, and in Western medicine,
particularly. I mean, what kinds of uh maladies, diseases
can stem from internal conflicts? I mean, uh, in
what sense can we apply this notion to uh
our understanding of pathology?
The, the first obvious example that usually comes to
mind when, when talking about it in this kind
of ways is, is cancer. We have mutations that
happen. That means that there are some of the
cells within the multicellular body, uh, who start to
proliferate, um, uh, and, and while doing so, they
grow, uh, in copy number, but then, in this
kind of tumor grows, but that comes at a,
at a cost to, to the rest of the,
um, rest of the body. Um, AND this then,
you, they, we say they proliferate, they do so
kind of under by an evolutionary process by, by
natural, uh, selection that some cells are dividing faster
than the surrounding ones. And in that way, at
that kind of within generation time scale, there's a
conflict, what's good for, um, For the tumor cells
and what, what is good for, uh, the rest
of the, uh, the body. So I think that
one has, uh, people have thought of, uh, uh,
as a conflict for, for, for quite a while.
Uh, PERHAPS more controversially, there, there have been kind
of ways you can think about complications that can
arise through, uh, pregnancy, where you, during the, the
development, uh, of a fetus, you go from something
being very clearly part of the, the, the mother's
body to developing into its own, uh, biological, uh,
entity. Um, AND while this is, of course, a
very, um, cooperative venture, uh, on the whole, that
does not mean that there are, um, opportunities for,
uh, conflicts to, to, to arise, particularly about how
much, um, uh, investment the mother should make into
this particular, um, offspring. And there are ways you
can kind of explain some of the complications that
can arise, uh, during pregnancy, such as, uh, hypertension
or high blood pressure and related kind of, uh,
maladies as something that, that may arise through this
kind of parent offspring, uh, conflict. Um, SO in
kind of in, in the chapter, so this is
a chapter that, that I co-wrote with, with, uh,
Amy Body, who's a biological anthropologist who's been very
interested in kind of evolutionary medicine kinds, uh, of
problems, and we try to point out that in
kind of in, in cancer, um, pregnancy-related, um, uh,
illnesses, but also some of these kind of phenomena
around microchimerism, where's this, which is this observation that
you get the inheritance of cells from, uh, parent
to, uh, offspring. And even kind of in the
opposite direction that offspring cells, uh, is are transferred
to, to the mother and from, uh, and, and
where they persist. And kind of making sense of
this from, from a kind of a paradoxical organism
or kind of conflictty views can be quite, um,
helpful and kind of, and makes us think about
new ways that this can be, uh, treated, uh,
rather than if you think of this as kind
of a, uh, machine-like cooperative, uh, venture.
And I'll, I'll, I'll add, it's again, we're doing
something, we do it regularly, and I, uh, it
comes naturally to us to think, think about all
these angles, all these internal conflicts, these selfish elements.
We've been, I've been described as a paranoid Darwinian,
uh, and that I'm always thinking about what are
these genes trying to do to me and these
genes trying to do to these other organisms, um,
and you, you can, you can actually, you can
explain phenomena that would otherwise be overlooked when you're,
when you're wearing the tin foil hat. So to
speak. Um, uh, ONE example comes to mind, uh,
is the humans and micro microbes. We don't actually,
we don't have much about humans and microbes. Uh,
IT'S just on my mind today, but We, we
think of them, sometimes you, you hear about them
being described as uh little helpers, like they help
you digest your food. If you were to remove
this species, you might suffer in certain ways. Another
perspective on that though, instead of thinking that everything
you have is part of you and is there
to help you, if instead you have the tin
foil hat like we do, and you think these
parts of you might have selfish agendas of their
own, if instead you think of there being this,
you know, conflicting relationship between microbes and humans, if
you remove something. Maybe what you're doing is exposing
this past history, this antagonistic history, co-evolution between the
microbe and the human under conflict. So now what
you expose is how the, the human body is
pushing back against whatever this microbe is trying to
do to it. So by removing the, the microbial
uh associate, you end up exposing this overshoot by
the host, some comb of defense. So you end
up being sick. Not because you've removed a part
that was helping you, you actually removed the part
that was harming you, but you're revealing this defense
that then causes an overshoot. Some of these overshoots
we also see um in imprinting disorders. So we
have imprinted genes that are expressed either from the
maternal side or the paternal side, and there is
a conflict, an inherent conflict, uh, between the two
halves of our genome. Um, OR described parent offspring
conflict where mothers and offspring. Don't fully agree. There's
a lot of cooperation there, but they don't, they're
not perfectly aligned and how much resources should be
transferred from mother to offspring. But it's even worse
than that because even within the offspring's body, those
two genomes don't agree. They're not perfectly aligned on
how much resource should be transferred, and imprinted genes
are the, the outcome of this evolutionary conflict. And
when you have mutations to these imprinted genes, you
often get overshoots or undershoots, and you get these
imprinting diseases, and they can be quite severe because
this co-evolutionary history. Of offense and defense and offense
and defense, you can view it sort of like
an arms race, has arms race dynamics to it.
You get this escalation of offense and defense, and
when you remove one party, you have a lot
of defense for no offense, or, or you have
a lot of offense and no defense against it,
and you end up with, you know, with the,
with the, the disease outcomes. So internal conflicts can
maybe generate. And make the system very vulnerable to
these kinds of outcomes. That's another perspective that the
internal conflict gets you is that these might be
prime sources uh of vulnerability to disease. So pregnancy
is a very fraught time during reproduction, uh, during,
during life, you would think evolutionarily, come on, natural
selection, get that right. That's where fitness happens is
that reproduction. But in fact, there's a lot of
conflict there and conflict begets some of these, these
outcomes, this vulnerability to disease. Mhm.
When it comes to cancer specifically, I mean, tell
us a little bit more, or I want to
ask you a little bit more about how we
should understand the conflict between cancer cells and the
entire organism or cancerous cells and other cells of
the organism, because I mean, if I understand it
correctly, cancer, I mean, it can be the result
of genetic mutations, genetic mutations that occur through environmental
influences, like for example, what you eat, exposure to
the sun, and so on, to UV rays and
so on. Or you can inherit some mutated genes
that predispose you to develop certain kinds of cancer,
and, uh, I mean, what happens is that cellular
division, which is usually controlled. Uh, GO, uh, I
mean, becomes uncontrolled and so cancerous cells continue to
proliferate beyond what would be normal for within that
organism that they inhabit and they start extracting also
resources from other cells, other tissues, other organs, and
so on, and I mean, I mean, so. Uh,
WHAT, what, how should we understand the conflict because
it's actually also a conflict between the genetic material
of the cancerous cell not being perfectly aligned with
the genetic material of the. Other cells correct or
is that not that not one of the ways
of understanding it?
So with cancer, there is this kind of multiple
things that are, that are, um, interacting, and I
think you, you kind of hit on the, the,
the key ones, right, that they, we Are used
to talking about that there you get these new
mutations that happen, uh, inside of you, and it
presses worth stepping, uh, uh, back, uh, one step
to say, well, why should that matter? Well, one
reason why that matters is otherwise, the cells in,
in our bodies, all the somatic cells, so the
non-kind of sex cells in our body are genetically,
uh, identical. So at birth, they are, OK. And
then you start this kind of accumulation, uh, throughout
your life that mutations. Happen in, in different parts
of, of your body. Most of these mutations will,
may not matter much, but every now and then
eventually you can get these mutations. Uh, THAT causes,
um, uh, cancers, um, behaviors to, to, to, to,
uh, to begin. Now, as you also point out,
we may have inherited genetic predispositions to this, so
that we are more vulnerable to certain kinds of
mutations that I say that if I've inherited this
one, A predisposition, should there be a new mutation
that happens in another gene, I'm more vulnerable to
that than someone who did not have that kind
of mutation that I was born with that I
had inherited. And of course they also point out
there is this kind of whole environmental thing that
you may have exposure to sunlight or smoking or,
uh or other things that are now well established
to, uh, interact with these kind of genetics of
it. Now, so what the situation arises with is
that you have this kind of conflict that may,
that we can think of a quantity then between
the tumor cells that are genetically distinct from the
rest of the body. So in that way, from
a kind of an evolutionary genetics point of view,
you kind of have a kind of a clear
explanation why the fitness interests of those, uh, ought
to be, ought to be different. Now, one thing
that Amy and I point out in our chapters
that one thing we've learned about tumors, uh, more
recently is also that within the tumor, there may
be kind of conflicts between different cancer cells within
the tumor because they in turn may be genetically
distinct. So it's not just that there are two
kinds. Of regular cells and cancer cells. It may
actually be regular cells, cancer cells, and within those
cancer cells, you have many different kinds, uh, genetically
different cancer cells within a single tumor. And they,
in turn, may compete with each other for resources.
So what's good for one. Kind of, it's kind
of a cancer cell isn't bad for another, and
that kind of is a dynamic that there are
some of these, uh, more kind of evolutionary-minded kind
of treatments try to harness that competition. So if,
if you kind of can promote it within tumor
competition, perhaps you can use that to slow down
overall, uh, tumor, uh, growth.
Right. So, uh, there are, I have two more
topics I would like to explore with you and
they fall more or less under the same rubric
of what we were already talking about here. Uh,
IN the book, uh, at least in one chapter,
you also explore the limitations of the body as
machine approaching medicine. So what is that approach? What
characterizes it, and then how would you contrast it
to the Paradox of the organism approach to health
and medicine and what do you think are the
limitations of the body as a machine approach that
perhaps we could overcome, at least to some extent
if we take this paradox of the organism framework
into health and medicine.
Because the first thing to say about the, the,
the, the, the body as a machine metaphor, which
is kind of, is exactly as I say, to
say that the body, um, is in a way
a machine. It has machine-like features in that they
kind of have these different parts that work together,
and you can kind of understand the function of
different parts of the body. Uh, BY, uh, thinking
of it as being part of this machinery. And
then, like, when an illnesses or maladies then arise
when something breaks. So you kind of go in
and you think, Well, how does this thing fit
together with the others? Um, BUT as you can
kind of see, underlying this metaphor is that, like,
machines. There's no conflict within machines. If you think
of our, our watch, maybe we can think of
that having the goal to tell time and you
can do that in an, in an analog way
that we, we have to reset every morning or
it can be in a digital way. But regardless,
there isn't that there are some parts of the
watch that does not want to show time or
want to show a different time. They're all gonna
have, we think of that machine parts have the
same goal. And that, I think we would say
is one of the weaknesses, that there's all these
reasons, empirically and theoretically evolutionary. To believe that bodies
are not like that. Bonds are distinct from machines
in, in numerous ways. One of them being that,
uh, because they are a product of evolution, they're
gonna have these remnants of evolutionary conflicts almost built
in to them. So if we always think that
all parts of the body are gonna work towards
the same goal, we're gonna miss out, uh, on
a lot of, uh, interesting biology, but also, I
think we're gonna, may, may end up misdiagnosing certain
parts, uh, uh. Um, OF when, when, when things
go, uh, when things go wrong. And that's why
I think this kind of like, uh, evolutionary, uh,
approaches that rely on trying to harness within tumor,
um, competitions is so, is so, is, is so
fascinating, both because it's a, it's a cool piece
of biology, but also I think it's, it shows
kind of like a kind of clinical or practical
application of taking this kind of, like, more, uh,
paradox perspective or the, the paranoid Darwinian, uh, perspective.
Uh, I think that helps us. Understand that much
more intuitively. That is not of course to say
that people have to have this perspective when, when,
when doing, uh, developing these approaches. They, they do
not. Many people who have pioneered these kind of
evolutionary minded approaches, um, don't take that, but I
think that kind of taking this kind of paranoid
perspective lends itself to seeing, uh, why that is,
is a promising avenue of research much more easily
than, than, than, than the alternatives.
Right. So, uh, one final topic I'd like to
ask you about. When it comes to genetic conflicts,
can they also get expressed on a psychological level?
And if so, what kinds of ways can they
get expressed?
Uh, MAYBE, uh, there's a, there's a feeling that,
uh, that possibly some of our internal psychological conflicts
stem from and are a readout of internal genetic
conflicts. Um, SO I think the internal genetic conflicts
that we have in mind here are these imprinted
gene conflicts where genes of maternal origin, genes of
paternal origin are expressed differently, and they're expressed differently
because they have different Interest in how the body
should develop or how the brain should develop in
this case. Um SO there were these really interesting
experiments back in the 90s where they put together
chimeric embryos made of a typical embryonic cell, but
then also mushed together with a cell that had
either two fathers, two paternal genomes, or two maternal
genomes, and what you found in these chimeric mice
is that their brains look quite different. Um, AND
I, I'm gonna, I, I might get the direction
of this wrong, but the The, the, the mice
that had the gynogenetic, the, the, the, the two
mother uh uh cells mixed in had a larger
neocortex. The ones with the two paternally derived genomes
had a larger, and again, I don't know the
neurobiology well, lizard brain is how I would describe
it. I'm sure that's not how a neurobiologist would
describe it, but they, they, they were enriched, those
cells were enriched in different parts of the brain,
and the brains themselves grew to different sizes in
different regions. Uh, AND an interpretation of this then
is that what paternity derived genes are pushing toward
is the development of more of that sort of,
uh, impulsive, uh, limbic system kind of, uh, uh,
brain. The maternity derived genome is pushing more for
the deliberative cooperative neocortex, uh, uh, parts of the
brain. Um, SO, because you have these different desires,
different goals, uh, of the different, uh, genomes. You
may, as you engage in life and and and
make decisions, you may hear these different impulses to
be a little more deliberative or a little more
impulsive, um, and that internal conflict, one thought is
that it may be is a readout of there
being these different genetic interests, um. But there's no
need. I, I think one of the things, uh,
Samiro Kasha covers this in his chapter, um, uh,
dance with this, with these models of, uh, you
really don't need, um, you don't need to have
a readout of the internal conflict genetically. You may
just have a brain that develops and it makes
a decision, uh, it's it's again developing under this
tug of war between the different interests, but once
you've got the brain developed, that's that. You don't
need to listen. You don't need to generate the.
The experience of those two conflicting impulses. Um, SO
you need not get internal psychological conflict from internal
genetic conflict. Uh, THERE'S no reason to expect that
that would come out, unless what Samir does in
his chapter, um, is, is think about how we
think about, uh, internal psychological conflicts, you know, are
they really, are there really two individuals there? Do
you ever have such a severe internal conflict that
you no longer have a single individual, that instead
you have. Uh, YOU know, uh, uh, dissociative identity
disorder, maybe this, this sort of thing where you
in fact, don't have one individual there, you have
multiple individuals because they have multiple interests, uh, in
the same way that when you have different genes
within a genome, they actually have different interests. The
maternally derived, maternally derived genomes don't have the same
interest. Uh, uh, THEY, they don't maximize their inclusive
fitness under the same brain. So you have these
internal conflicts genetically, if they were so severe. That
the organism would, you know, cease to exist. That,
that is an inherent possibility, but not when we
observe often. Uh, IT'S maybe we can observe more
often, um, in psychological conflicts where the internal conflicts
are so severe, you might want to say that
someone has, there are two individuals, um, residing in
that one bundle of biological activity. So, so, so
Okasha takes these ideas about organisms and their internal
conflicts and turns the lens on psychological conflicts. Take
some of the lessons we've, we've learned from, uh,
organismal conflicts to, to that domain.
OK, but if that is correct, if Doctor Okash's
sort of suggestion there is correct, then could that
help us get a better understanding of at least
potentially certain uh psychological disorders?
I, I, I think it gives us a lens
through which to view those, those particular disorders of
internal conflicts. I, I'm not, again, I don't think
it, there, there's no sense in which those disorders
come from developmentally internal genetic conflicts.
I mean, in, in a way it's kind of
run through several of the chapters here that's like
this. Kind of two questions that like Samir is,
is interrogating. One is this kind of like empirical
claim. Is there a core, is there a kind
of actually a mechanistic link between genes that are
involved in in internal conflict and the kind of
psychological sensation of being conflicted as a As, as,
as a self, and it seems like there, there
isn't. Um, THAT being said, you can kind of
still think of that kind of like feeling of
being a divided self as a kind of internal
content. I think that he showsis can be quite
a productive, uh, way. But to the, to, to
the extent that it, that it will help us
improve treatments of it or our understanding of it,
I think it will come through that kind of
conceptual route rather than through the kind of mechanistic.
Um, GENETICAL one.
OK, great. So I mean there will be many
other topics that we could talk about here today,
but we're reaching our time limit. So the book
is again The Paradox of the organism, adaptation and
internal conflict. I will be leaving, of course, a
link to it in the description of the interview.
And, uh, Doctor Ogren and Paton, would you both
like to tell the audience where they can find
you on the internet and the rest of your
work starting with you, Doctor Ogren?
Uh, SO you, um, you, you can find meratin,
in, in two main, uh, uh, places. There's my,
my own website which is Avidarren.com. Um, AND, and
these days, um, with, with regards to social media,
it would be Blue Sky, which is also, uh,
Avidarren.
Uh, WHAT about you, Dr. Pen? The
patent lab.com is how you can find me out.
You won't find me on Blue Sky, and you
might find me on Twitter, but you won't find
me active on Twitter or X.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a very interesting conversation.
Thanks for having us.
Yeah, thanks for having us. It's a lot of
fun as usual.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, Jo Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Ia Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stinnik,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.